Hello there.
This is the room.
Now let's look at anonymous classes.
We will also look at how it is typically used in practice, and we will also extend our previous demo
further in this lecture.
An anonymous class, as the name suggests, is basically anonymous.
That is, it does not have a name.
To understand anonymous class, let's consider this three set constructor, which takes a competitor
as input.
And we know that competitor is an interface which has the abstract method compare, which we know compares
two arguments and it helps in maintaining the sorting order in that reset.
We know that we can define concrete courses that would implement the comparator interface.
However, we can also use anonymous classes to implement the comparator interface.
And here is how it is done.
We are creating an instance of reset and the argument to the reset constructor is an instance of an
anonymous class that is implementing the competitor interface.
Since we are creating an instance, the argument includes the new keyword, which is followed by the
anonymous class declaration, which starts with the name competitor, and this followed by empty parentheses.
As we are creating an instance and the empty parenthesis is followed by the actual body of the anonymous
class, which starts and ends with curly braces.
Just like a regular class or interface.
And within the body, the implementation for compare method is provided, which is using the length
of the input strings as the sorting criteria.
As you can see, there is no separate class name here.
We are using the interface name comparator itself and that would by itself imply that we are implementing
the comparator interface.
So anonymous class is different from our regular interface implementation where we would have some class
name followed by the implements keyword, which would in turn be followed by the interface name.
So we can see that with an anonymous class we are both declaring and instantiating it at the point of
use and we can do this anywhere.
An expression is legal, but usually it is used as a method argument as we see here.
Note that here comparator is an interface, but it can as well be a class two.
And if that class includes a constructor with some parameter, then the anonymous class declaration
can invoke that constructor, bypassing the necessary arguments which would be specified in that parentheses.
So this whole expression that we have here can be read as create an object of an anonymous class that's
inherited from competitor.
And under the hood.
This is what is exactly happening.
That is compiler will create a separate top level class corresponding to the anonymous class.
And that class would implement the competitor interface.
So in bytecode there is no anonymous nested class.
It is represented by a top level class.
As mentioned earlier, such anonymous classes that get created as top level classes would have class
names such as dollar one, dollar two and so on.
Where order is the name of the enclosing class?
And the class name would be followed by the keyword implements or extends depending on whether the anonymous
class is inheriting from an interface or a class.
So in reality, there is no inner class.
It would be implicitly represented by a top level class, and that class would be instantiated in the
outer class.
This applies to all nested classes and not just anonymous classes.
It is just that with other nested classes, the name of the nested class would be our class name.
In our class name.
But with anonymous class it would be our class name.
Some number.
One common use of anonymous classes is for creating functional objects.
The competitor implementation we just saw was an example of a function object, and a function object
has two properties associated with it.
One is that its methods operate on other objects.
So that would be a function object.
That is a method.
Parameters are other objects in our competitive implementation.
In the previous slide, the compare method also operated on two input string objects.
On second property.
Is that a function object?
Exports only one method.
So a function object is basically an instance of a type with these two properties.
And type can be a class or an interface.
If it is an interface, we refer to the interface as a functional interface.
We briefly discussed functional interface in Oops chapter when discussing default methods.
So a competitive interface is also a functional interface.
However, it does have more than one method.
You can see that in the API spec of competitor, but it still qualifies as functional interface as it
has only one abstract method compare.
It also has another abstract method equals.
But since subclasses would inherit the equals method from the object class, the competitive interface
would still be considered as a functional interface.
So function objects can be implemented as anonymous classes.
They can also be implemented via Lambda Expressions, which we will discuss later.
This use case of using anonymous class for function objects is also recommended in this item from effective
Java, which says use function objects to represent strategies as in the strategy pattern.
In our example, in the previous slide, the compare method has defined a strategy of comparing.
We are length of the input strings in order to sort the elements of three set.
So that was the strategy.
And we can use other anonymous classes to declare other strategies.
The competitor interface itself would be referred to as strategy interface and the anonymous classes
implementing it would be the concrete strategy classes.
So anonymous classes are good for defining function objects while non static member classes which we
saw earlier are good for defining adapters.
In the demo that we'll be doing shortly.
We will implement a function object using an anonymous class.
Let's now look at a few best practices when working with anonymous classes.
First one is that anonymous class definitions should be shot with ten lines or fewer.
Otherwise, it will affect readability.
This one is actually recommended in item 22 in effective Java, and previous one about function objects
was from item 21.
Item 21 also recommends one other thing.
We know that anonymous classes are declared and instantiated at the point of use.
So an anonymous object is being created every time that anonymous class expression is being executed.
And if the expression is going to be executed frequently, then we are also repetitively creating anonymous
objects.
And that could be very expensive.
In such cases, we can use a private, static, final field to declare and instantiate the anonymous
class as we see here.
With this, only one anonymous object will be created and we can reuse it by just using the field name.
In this case we can pass the filename.
SDR underscore length underscore comparator as argument to the preset constructor.
Not that here.
The type argument on the right is emphasized in red font and that's because it cannot be auto inferred
in the case of anonymous classes.
That is, the diamond notation will not work with anonymous classes.
It does not work in both Java seven and Java eight, and it may be supported in future versions.
Also noted the ending race of the anonymous class in this case is followed by a semicolon.
And that's because here we have a full blown statement.
So semicolon is required.
Another advantage of this approach is that we can also have a nice descriptive name for the field indicating
what the anonymous class actually does here.
STR Underscore length underscore comparator tells us that the comparison is based on the length of input
strings.
Other strategies can be represented with other descriptive names.
Note that an anonymous class will have access to the enclosing class if and only if the anonymous class
occurs in a non static context.
What it means is if the anonymous class is declared inside a static method, then it would not be possible
for the anonymous class to access an instance member of the enclosing class.
That is, it will not have access to the enclosing class object.
That's because it is declared inside a static method.
But if it is declared in an instance method, then it would not be an issue.
That is, an anonymous class object would have access to the enclosing object by maintaining a hidden
reference ID, just like in the case of non static member class and hence it will be able to access
the outer objects instance members to.
As Anonymous closes nameless.
It cannot have a named constructor.
However it can have an instance initial user for initializing any variables.
Now let's go ahead and do a short demo of Anonymous Glass, and then we will come back and we will look
at a few limitations of anonymous classes.
In this demo, we are going to extend the cash program, which we wrote in the previous demo.
So we had cash and we also had bookmark in order to maintain the cash off lockbox.
Now one thing I added here in the bookmark is I added this new instance variable called rating.
Earlier we had only ID and title, so we are introducing rating and it also has getter on certain methods
and in cash Java, you may recall that we were creating all this bookmarks and adding it to the cache
which was storing it in a bookmark array.
So this is the cache.
So here we are setting the rating.
So it's just for the first item.
It is one for the second, two, three, four and five.
So in the previous demo we implemented an adapter using a non static member class.
So here we are going to use anonymous class to implement a function object.
In this case, the function object would would actually sort these items, these five items in the bookmark
area will be sorted by rating.
So that would be the function object.
And we are going to use anonymous class and the sorting will be in the remaining order.
So that's the user function of anonymous classes.
So here we are adding them.
So in order to start, we are just going to use arrays dot sort method.
And we need to pass the items.
Oct items and to sort it.
Let's implement.
Competitor and it is gentrified.
So let's pass bookmark.
And we need empty parentheses.
And opening and closing race.
And we need to implement the unimplemented method which is compare.
Here is compare and it is taking two parameters bookmark one and bookmark two.
So it would be an function object.
So let me just copy the logical habit here.
So we are just taking the rating and we are comparing with the rating of the second parameter.
And since we need to sort in descending order, it will return a one, otherwise it would return a minus
one.
In case you don't remember, you can just look up the API spec to see how compare has to be implemented.
So that's about it.
And other than that, here we are simply printing the rating.
And.
Before this, we were just iterating all the items.
Now, since it will be in descending order of the rating, the items will be printed in in the reverse
order.
So let me just run it.
It will be clear.
So here it is.
So here we have the output from the previous demo.
Simply, we are simply printing all the items in the cache, the titles.
So now we are printing in the reverse order in the decreasing order of the rating.
So that's why you'll see that virtual hosting and and Tomcat, which was the last one earlier, is first
here.
So they're all displayed in the reverse order of the rating.
Now, we also said that if this piece of functionality here is being repetitively used instead of creating
an object, every single time, we can define this in the anonymous class in a private, static, final
field.
So that's what we are doing here.
So the reference type is competitor of bookmark and we are using a descriptive name rating underscore
competitor and the rest of the code is just similar.
It's like this only thing is just to show you guys I'm also have included this instance initialize our
block and just remember that there is this semicolon here because this is a normal declaration statement.
So let me comment this out here.
And here I have.
This invoking the sword method using the rating underscore competitor field and the output would still
be same.
It's just that here we have the instance user displayed because I have a print statement here.
So here it is.
So it cannot we cannot have a constructor here named constructor.
We can only have instance initialize for initializing some variables.
Now other than that, the third one I want to show is.
Here.
I created a class called FUBAR.
It has a protected variable instance, variable y.
And FUBAR is a class and it has a constructor and it takes an int value x and simply re assigns y with
x.
So this is to just show that we can also inherit an anonymous class can be used to implement a class.
So this is what we are doing here.
Full bar and we are passing five.
So we are invoking a constructor of four with the value five and and we have this method called go and
here we are simply printing the value of y.
So Y is a protected instance variable in full bar class.
Let me take you back here.
Here it is.
And this is the constructor and this is the variable.
So let's go back and you can see that an instance is being created.
At this point, the go method is not yet invoked.
So we are putting a dot operator here and we are invoking the go method.
So it might look a bit strange this statement, but we are simply creating an object of Foo Bar and
we are invoking the go method.
So let me also run this.
And as you can see, it is printing the value, right.
So that's about inheriting from a class.
Now, in the earlier demo we had as the static member class, which was my cash iterator, it was implementing
the interface cache iterator.
Now within this.
So what I have done is I have commented or commented this out and I have moved this whole thing into
the iterator method.
Earlier in the iterator method, we were making an instance of this particular class and we were returning
it.
But now I just wanted to show that we can also implement it as an anonymous class.
So within the iterator method you can see that I'm directly creating an instance of the interface cache
iterator because this is an anonymous class and we have the same body here and we are assigning it to
cache iterator.
This is the reference type, so there is no longer my cache iterator.
It is replaced with this.
And this is what we have.
So it's already there and we have already run it.
So it's working fine.
Now here items is the bookmark.
So we can see that we can access instance variables off the enclosing class items is part of cache.
And in order to do that under the hood, what is happening is it is going to create a separate class
for this.
The compiler is going to create a separate top level class for this with a constructor and it will pass
a reference to the off the cache object reference to cache object to the newly created anonymous class,
which is created as a top level class.
So at this this reference will be passed and using that it will access the items bookmark so if we see
here.
Here it is on the hard disk so we can see that it has created all these classes representing the anonymous
class.
Cash.
Dollar one.
Cash dollar two in cash dollar three.
So just wanted to show that so we can access and within that class it will use this reference.
It will use the hidden reference to access items.
So that's one thing.
And one final thing I want to show is.
So this is a method.
And within this method we are having anonymous class.
Now, if we want to access any local variable, for example, there is this local variable count.
And if we simply want to access it here in this way, let's say, then this variable has to be declared
final.
It has to be final, at least prior to July eight.
It has to have this key word final.
Otherwise, it will give a compilation error.
Now, in Java eight, it need not be final, but it should not be.
It should not be changed anywhere within the within the scope of this method.
And it is called as effectively final, which is which means that it is it is final.
And so with Java eight, we don't need the keyword.
But let's say if I increment it here.
So it gives a compilation error here.
It says local variable count defined in an enclosing scope must be final or effectively final.
So we cannot do that.
And the reason for that seems like it is just for simplicity, because sometimes this cache iterator
instance, this iterator can be passed to some other method or some other thread in case of multithreading.
And that will be executing in a different in a different stack.
But here we might increment the count value like this.
In which case there may be a need to increment the count in that and within the anonymous class object.
So that could be the scenario.
And probably just for simplicity, they don't want to do that.
So they made it final and.
But one thing is this iterator can be returned here in the like in this case.
So it has this if it is an instance variable, if it is a variable like items, which is an instance
variable in the enclosing class, then it is fine because this items will be accessed using the hidden
reference.
But since this is a local method here, it's a method and this is a local variable and the scope of
this variable ends with the method.
But the iterator object itself is surviving the scope and so we cannot use the hidden reference to access
this variable.
So for that reason it is going to make a copy of it.
The compiler will make a copy of this count and it will internally in the new top level class that it
creates.
It creates a separate variable for count and it assigns the value to that, the count value to that.
That's how it is internally implemented.
So that's just for your information.
So that's about it.
Now let's head back to the slides to look at the limitations.
Now let's look at few limitations of anonymous classes.
First one is we obviously cannot inherit from multiple types.
That is, we cannot implement multiple interfaces.
Similarly, we cannot extend one class and at the same time implement an interface.
Next limitation is that clients using an anonymous object can only invoke members that are inherited
from a super type.
That is, it is impossible to invoke any members that are defined only in the anonymous class.
Next.
It can be instantiated only at the point of declaration.
Right.
Finally, anonymous class cannot be used with instance of tests or any where a class name is required.
So that's about it.
An anonymous class is typically used to implement function objects.
Thank you.